Discourse A: Scientific Progress
Participants loading on this discourse tended to be open-minded about new discoveries. If genome
editing is proven to be safe, they see no reason to oppose it. They trust in science and medical
professionals and tend to agree that decisions about genome editing should be left to the experts.
This trust is also reflected in disagreement with statements expressing doubts about the motivations
and possible consequences of genome editing. They disagree with statements that suggest that the
real aim of human genome editing will be enhancement for the wealthy and that gene editing for non-
medical reasons will have negative social consequences.
Scientific optimists do not feel discomfort about anything that’s been
created in a lab and nor do they feel like genome editing is interfering
too far in human creation. Importantly, they feel strongly that their cultural beliefs do not make them
cautious about genome editing.
People subscribing to scientific optimism are more likely than other discourses to be OK with having
their own genes edited, or using it for their children to give them an advantage in life. They emphasise
the potential benefits of genome editing for medical treatment and feel excited that people with
genetic conditions could be cured in our lifetime, agreeing that it’s better to prevent a disease
happening than having to treat it later, and that we have an obligation to strengthen future
generations by eradicating disease.

###

Discourse B: Principled Concern
Participants loading on this discourse are not opposed to genome editing per se but are concerned
about the social and ethical implications of the technology. They worry that as we start to tinker with
the genome, something could go wrong. They tend to feel strongly that genome editing should not
be used for non-medical purposes and are concerned about issues of equity and access.
This discourse emphasises the potential social consequences of human genome editing. Participants
associated with this discourse are concerned about equity and access, and feel strongly that the
technology, if available, should be available to everybody. Concomitantly, they are worried that
genome editing will advantage some groups over others and widen the gap between those who can
afford to use the technology and those who cannot. Nevertheless, they find that the possibility of
curing genetic conditions is incredible.
People associated with this discourse feel strongly that genome editing should not be used for non-
medical purposes, such as changing someone’s appearance or behaviour. They do not believe that
parents should not have the right to edit their children’s genes before they are born. They are also
concerned about possible futures of genome editing such as reducing genetic diversity, making
decisions for future generations, and gene editing being used as quick fix, although they don’t feel as
strongly about these as they do about inequality.
When it comes to the relationship between our genes and identity, this discourse takes an interesting
perspective. Whilst they do feel that when you change someone’s genes you change you who they
are, they don’t think that having strong genes is the key to wellbeing.

###

Discourse C: Profound Concern
Participants loading on this discourse are cautious about genome editing. They tend to feel that
science and technology are controlling our lives, but while they think we should remain as natural as
possible, they do not think we should shy away from the chance to save lives. Like Scientific Optimists,
they tend to be open-minded about new discoveries, but they disagree that decisions about genome
editing should be left to the experts.
They feel that their cultural beliefs make them cautious about gene editing. They view gene editing
as interfering a bit too far in human creation. At the same time, the culturally cautious do think we
should keep an open mind about new discoveries. Out of all four discourses, this is the only one
disagreeing that decisions about gene editing are best left to the experts.
The culturally cautious viewpoint thinks we should remain as natural possible, without shying away
from furthering medicine that saves lives. Along the same lines, the culturally cautious do agree it’s better to prevent a disease from happening rather than treating it
later, and strongly agree that mitochondrial donation is just like any
other organ transplant. It definitely does not sicken them to hear that genome editing will ‘cure’
disability and they don’t necessarily think it’s better to accept things the way they are. Yet this
viewpoint does not believe humans will need gene editing to survive. They are also concerned about
the slippery slope from medical to nonmedical uses and do not think it’s okay to use gene editing to
change someone’s appearance.
The results of the mapping study helped to ensure diversity in the selection of Australian Citizens’
Jury participants, as described in the next section.

###

Discourse D: Agnosticism
Participants loading on this discourse are relatively unconcerned by the risks of genome editing when
compared to other discourses. They are intrigued by the possibilities of the technology but are not
convinced that it is necessary — it could be better to accept things the way they are.
The third discourse accounts for just 5% of the study variance, but this doesn’t mean it should be
dismissed. It still means that this viewpoint exists in the wider community and we can’t say anything
about its wider prevalence it is at this stage. The overall perspective from the intrigued agnostic seems
to be relatively unconcern about genome editing compared to other viewpoints - unconvinced it will
become a necessity, aware that there are unanswered questions and less worried than other discourses
about the medical benefits or ethical implications. At the same time, they are intrigued by the
possibilities of genome editing.
Intrigued agnostics keep an open mind about new discoveries, and for them genome editing is really
cool science. At the same time, they seem to doubt the necessity of gene editing for humans,
disagreeing that we will need it to survive or that it would be OK to use it to speed up evolution.
Although intrigued agnostics agree that we don’t know enough about the long-term consequences
of gene editing and we could accidentally introduce other problems, they are not worried about
something going terribly wrong. Intrigued agnostics also appear relatively unconcerned about
possible non-medical uses such as enhancement for wealthy people and they’re not worried about
the idea that gene editing can make perfect people, reflected in their cautious agreement with using
the technology to change peoples’ appearance. Intrigued agnostics do think that parents want to
create designer babies out of vanity but from their response to other statements, it’s possible they
don’t think this is necessarily a bad thing. They do have some doubts about genome editing and think
it could be better to accept things as they are, whilst at the time would consider having their own
genes edited, since everyone has a right to decide that for themselves.
The intrigued agnostic strongly believes that we find strength when we face illness and adversity, and
that if you have strong genes, you will have wellbeing although it is difficult to make a direct
connection between this and their position on gene editing. Intrigued agnostics share similarities with
scientific optimism when they agree that it’s better to prevent a disease than treat it later, but they
don’t place the same emphasis that scientific optimists do on the medical implications and benefits of
genome editing. They also seem relatively unconcerned with the ethical and social implications that
worry ethical sociologists.